The abundance of marine stratocumulus clouds over Earth's surface is an essential part of Earth's energy budget. Their contribution to the total amount of reflected shortwave radiation on Earth outweighs any other cloud type (Wood 2012). They are most commonly found over midlatitude and cooler subtropical ocean regions. However, as important as stratocumuli are for us to study, their presence in Global Climate Models (GCMs) is limited. Changes in cloud coverage and thickness are impacted by aerosol-stratocumulus interactions and low-cloud feedbacks, which create extremely challenging barriers to climate prediction research. These controlling processes occur on such a small scale, making them incredibly difficult to model, but their impacts on the radiation budget are drastic (Wood 2012). This is a dilemma in clouds research that we continue to face today and motivates our work. The goal of this machine learning project is to investigate the accuracy with which classical machine learning models and deep learning models can predict and map cloud fraction. 

We intend to investigate cloud fraction over a small portion of the Western Atlantic Ocean where marine stratocumulus clouds are in abundance and where significant previous research has been conducted (NASA ACTIVATE 2020-2024). Choosing to focus on open ocean rather than a coastal region also eliminates topographical barriers. The goal is to train three deep machine learning models in tandem with a series of classical machine learning models on various cloud properties constrained by meteorlogical variables and conditions present in the test region to predict cloud fraction. We also aim to determine which cloud property is most important in predicting cloud fraction. 

We will use satellite data from GOES-16 and ERA5 reanalysis data at 0.25 x 0.25 resolution. All data will be linearly interpolated to fill missing regions. The chosen satellite variables for investigation include cloud top temperature, cloud optical depth, reflected shortwave radiation, downward shortwave radiation, and a grayscale imagery product. The grayscale imagery product combines the red, green, and blue channels (their associated wavelengths) from the cloud and moisture imagery product in the L2 processing database (Hall 2024). The reanalysis data will contain single level zonal wind at 10 meters, meridional wind at 10 meters, temperature at 2 meters, sea surface temperature, upward latent and sensible heat fluxes at the surface, and high, low, and total cloud cover. 

The expected outcome of this project will be to design three different neural newtork deep learning models well enough that we can compare the accuracy between them in mapping total cloud fraction over the Atlantic Ocean for the month of April 2020. Furthermore, if the clasical machine learning models succeed, conducted feature importance should yield reflected shortwave radiation as the most important predictor variable when training the models. We anticipate many challenges in training and testing these models. However, if results are successful and comprehensive, this could ultimately tighten our understanding of physical cloud processes in marine stratocumulus model research.
